meaty nook he's a pretty happy guy and
I'd be pretty happy too if this was the
first time that my community had just
gained access to fresh water
Enochs from the country of Malawi the
small sliver of a country in southern
Africa known as the warm heart of Africa
over the past ten years five million
more people like Enoch in Malawi have
gained access to fresh water but what's
unfortunate is that this picture is a
lie I'll come back to that in a second
ten years ago two Waterloo engineers
sparked a movement across Canada called
engineers Without Borders and this
movement was based on the concept that
it was completely unacceptable that five
million people in Malawi did not have
access to fresh water when US engineers
back in Canada were working on problems
such as making a photocopier increased
speed from 149 pages a minute to 151
pages per minute we need to work on
problems that mattered I was fortunate I
got I founded the Calgary chapter here
and I got to be the first director of
overseas programs for engineers Without
Borders in Africa or worked for years
and I got to work with hundreds of
businesses non-government organizations
government's all working in this field
of development and it was really
fantastic working for engineers Without
Borders because even though we worked on
100 million dollar projects we had this
philosophy that if we were really going
to understand the problems in local
Africa we needed to live like local
Africans so as a lot of expatriates
would spend most of the time in the
capital cities and boardrooms we'd spend
our time in villages learning local
languages traveling on public transports
and what this allowed us to do was to
get a really really deep understanding
of what was going on at the field level
and combined with this experience and
hundreds of other engineer's web boards
experiences we got a really interesting
perspective of what's going on in this
aid industry now the aid industry has
got a lot of attention lately a lot of
economists have become authors and have
written about it there's a lot of
controversy about its effectiveness some
even stating asking a question like has
Aid failed it's a very interesting
question now
I can confidently say on behalf of
engineers Without Borders staff members
that failed or not we definitely feel
that the aid system is broken and when I
say broken I'm not talking about that
what the media usually talks about or
not it's not about corrupt dictators or
about corruption those issues still
happen at for Africa but they're much
more than minority than they are
mainstream today so I'm talking about
aid being broken in
democratically-elected stable
governments with no civil unrest
countries like Ghana Malawi and Zambia
so talked about Malawi the World Bank
has stated that people in Malawi now
have eighty percent of the people in law
I have access to fresh water sources so
one of our staff members in Malawi this
is Owen
I was visiting one of those water points
and it was a gravity-fed system that was
commissioned by the Canadian government
and finished about a year and a half ago
and a gravity-fed system basically is a
bunch of pipes that pipe water down from
an elevated region down into a number of
communities where there's a bunch of
taps and people can access that water he
was going around and turning on some of
those taps and some of them weren't
working so we asked the community about
like well how many of these aren't
working and they said well out of 113 81
81 what's the problem what's going on
and he found out that well a lot of the
pipes had sprung leaks and broken down
all right not a big deal pipes break
down everywhere but the problem with
this project was that even though the
infrastructure was all built there was
no thinking about who was going to
maintain this system and even some
people really took initiative and tried
to fix the pipes themselves but there
was a lack of affordable spare parts
available this situation is typical this
show is a graphic showing one area of
Malawi because it's a urban area with a
green dots are functional water points
yellow are ones that are working but
breaking down and red are not functional
hardly eighty percent actually engineers
Without Borders has done some work and
found out that's even those eighty
percent coverage of water points forty
percent are not working see this issue
is a lot of donors and projects end up
focusing on the hardware side of the
issue and not focus not really realizing
the importance of the software side of
things
and they'd be the first like whoa
software of course you have to do
maintenance but when you think about it
from if people are donating to charities
it's it makes you feel a lot better if
you know that your money went to
something tangible something like a well
something like a school something like
giving a family a goat it's not as sexy
you're easy to tell your friends about
how you built a what our helps fund the
water committee or paid for teacher
salaries so when I say that this picture
of Enoch is a lie it's not a lie when
the picture is taken it only becomes a
lie a year or two afterwards when
looking at these pictures one of my
great colleagues so that everything
people see from Africa doesn't matter
and everything that matters from Africa
people don't get a seat
and his problem goes a lot further than
just broken down water points see Owen
after seeing this water point he
discovered not more than 30 feet away
hey there's another set of taps that
look really broken down too but they're
not attached to this system he asked the
community what of that what that said oh
that's the American government gravity
fed water system it was built over ten
years ago I said what happened to that
so it also broke down about a year and a
half later how is it that a project that
failed ten years ago was rebuilt almost
the same technology same process and had
exactly the same failure ten years later
I've recently joined a startup company
that sells goods online that use a lot
of them from Africa fair trade goods
sort of ethical concern like the ethical
eBay or Amazon and what we've learnt as
being a private sector startup is that
if we don't serve our customers and we
don't provide them a product that they
need they won't buy it and then if we
don't innovate and change and adapt to
their needs we go to business so they
have a power to hold us accountable now
if we look at the public sector it
doesn't adapt and change quite as fast
as the private sector but at the end of
the day if the elected government does
not meet the needs of its constituents
they have a chance to vote them out of
power therefore holding them accountable
but if we look at the development sector
and if they don't serve the needs of
their beneficiaries these are not just
not NGOs their governments and they are
businesses as well the beneficiaries
have no power to vote them out or to
fire them the people who have that power
the donors when you look at the system
you can kind of start to see some of the
challenges development sector that
focuses more on pleasing the donors and
making them happy and communicating to
them as opposed to understanding the
needs of the beneficiaries and because
of that systemic challenge is very slow
to innovate there's very little change
and you get projects exactly the same
project built ten years later that fails
in exactly the same way so what do we do
about this
first answer is easy we invest in the
private and public sectors in the
developing world
they're inherently structurally built to
be more sustainable and to allow
beneficiaries to hold them accountable
however 70 percent of people in
sub-saharan Africa still make less than
$2 a day are still in poverty and a lot
of that reason is because the private
and the public sector is not serving
them appropriately so we do need to
invest in businesses in Africa and
governments in Africa but it's still
going to take a long time for the
problems to be fixed therefore that
leaves us with one option and we need to
work with this system so therefore we
have to fix it
we need to make it more accountable more
creative and more transparent we need to
start innovating coming up with really
neat ideas ideas like giving
beneficiaries a chance to rate their
projects using their mobile phones that
donors and the development sector and
NGOs can understand or moving our donors
closer to our beneficiaries currently
only 20% of the Canadian international
development agencies African staff are
based in Africa ideas like funding
development sector like VC's fund
businesses what would it be like if a
donor funded 10 projects and expected
four of them to do okay one of them to
do fantastic and five of them to fail
and not all of the solutions need to be
that complex engineer suborders is
working on one that's actually quite
simple
it's admitting failure my first project
with insurance of borders was in India I
worked with a bunch of schools poor the
poorest schools in India the untouchable
caste this is Benny she was a girl who
was at one of these schools and she had
to spend two to three hours a day and
her classmates to walk and collect water
to bring it back to the school so that
they could have fresh water to drink and
for cooking and for going to the
bathroom my job is an engineer's Without
Borders was to help solve this problem
and so I worked with the communities and
he came up with these rainwater
harvesting solutions to collect water
from the rooftops during the monsoons
bring them through gutters filter them
and store
for the dry season I worked there for a
number of months and by the time I left
we had the project funded and there is
being implemented I returned back home
to Canada almost a hero people my
friends and family were wow it's
fantastic you gave up your job in the
oil and gas sector to go volunteer in
India that's really inspiring
a year later I contacted man geo to see
you know how everything was going with
rainwater harvesting systems and they
told me that not a single one was still
operating the reason was because a lot
of them hadn't been built but some of
them had broken down because there was
no maintenance schedule in place I'd
made the exact same mistake that I
criticized earlier when I thought of my
friends and family back home who thought
I was such a hero
I felt like an impostor I thought of
Annie I didn't didn't help her at all so
admitting failure is actually quite hard
and I didn't tell many people about this
and one of the only things that helped
me feel better about this and it's a
shame to say this was that I started to
learn that other people and engineers
what borders had failed to but injures
the boards have this culture of
embracing failure openly and letting us
talk about it and it was only through a
bunch of us talking about failure that
we really got to see we're making a lot
of mistakes and we got to see we're
making the same mistakes and we can
actually learn from these mistakes and
we started to innovate we started to
change engineer's orders is drastically
different now ten years later than what
we thought engineer should be doing in
development we don't build water points
anymore actually and matter of fact we
don't build anything other than
spreadsheets we now have this innovative
marketing campaign sponsor and African
spreadsheet because we understand that
the problems are not Hardware problems
it's all about that software side of
things but it's a really hard concept to
get across to people people still want
to fund wells and schools but it's
really about the software side of things
and it's a lot longer process to fund
those things and it's not sexy but it
works so the next thing that happened is
our staff members we're really excited
about sharing this failure internally
but we still were not doing a good job
of letting other people know and some of
our very courageous field staff were
really getting upset the management
because other projects we're gonna make
the same tailor
and they weren't learning so they pushed
our management staff and we were nervous
about it about publishing our failures
but for the last three years engineers
of the borders has published an annual
failure reports citing our biggest
failures at first as well how do your
donors think and you know I think how
would how did my donors how would they
feel if they knew that the money that
they had spent and saved up and
generously donated had had no impact and
that it's tough and our donors felt that
too but once they started reading the
failures they understood the power of
those lessons learnt and realize it's an
injustice not to be sharing these then I
realize that reports not hundreds
reports so we built a website admitting
failure calm and this is for all
organizations to come and start
admitting their failures and to start
having a discussion about failure the
concept is catching on the Harvard
Business Review just last month
published their first review focused on
failure to big companies lately have
also dealt with fit I'm talking to my
friends and you know and other sectors
and it's not just the development sector
that has this challenge it's an across a
lot of other sectors and two companies
had a lot of big failures lately what's
interesting about them is that one of
them publicly admitted their failure and
talked about how that what they learn
from it what they're going to do next
time the other one kind of tried to not
talk about a doll I think it'll be an
interesting looking forward to see which
of those strategies works going I'd like
to ask people to first of all think
about how does your organization think
about and share failure maybe ask the
person next to you cuz I think it
generates some really interesting
conversations and lastly I'd like to
sure and dracs this question that was
asked has aid failed I think I'll say
that for me the answer is yes but only
because it hasn't failed enough thank
you